README.md, before:

Disjoint Shuffle in a Looping Sequence
=====
© 2018 David Lareau, Independent Scientist

# Abstract

This paper proposes a novel approach at shuffling a looping sequence that minimizes caveats of naive solutions, keeps computation low, and offers a high degree of variance.

# Introduction

Imagine you are listening to the songs of an album, and set it up such that the songs be played in random order, and that the albums loops. What are your expectation once all songs have played? Should the songs be replayed in the same order, or should they be reshuffled? If you expect the later, are you ok with the last song you've heard being the next first song?

This paper compares various ways of generating a shuffled looping sequence, measuring statistics on the distance between duplicate entries.

TODO degenerate case 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 long sequence. When does it start making sense to use disjoint shuffle.

# Related Works

The algorithms described in this paper are presented to build-up to the less intuitive **Disjoint Shuffle**. The literature doesn't seem to cover shuffling looping sequence, so I chose names for each algorithms.

In the wild, it is common for music players to have a *Random* or *Shuffle* feature. In VLC Media Player [1] 3.0.4 on a Linux desktop, the behavior of the *Random* toggle is like the **Shuffle** algorithm described below, where the same song can be heard twice in a row at the looping boundaries.

# Algorithms

## Stateless

One of the simplest algorithm to think about when generating the next entry in a sequence is to select it randomly, without keeping track of any states. This opens up the possibility that an item be seen an infinite amount of times in a row, or never be seen at all.

The variance in the sequence is ideal, meaning the next entry is always a surprise.

```C
uint32_t next() {
  return arc4random_uniform(n);
}
```

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 1 | 0.01 | horrid |
| max | 946 | 9.46 | horrid |
| avg | 100.26 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 98.29 | 0.98 | ideal |

## Shuffle

An improvement over the stateless method, is to keep the sequence shuffled in memory, visiting each entry once before reshuffling it and going over it again.

At the cost of memory, we now avoid the embarassing flaws of the stateless approach. All entries will be seen, and only once per full pass. The variance is much lower than the stateless approach because of these restrictions, but it's still ideal given the compromise.

Note that the common algorithm for shuffling (Fisher-Yate [2]) is iterative, so you do not need to shuffle the whole list prior of reading the next entry. You can perform the shuffle one item at a time, meaning the size of the sequence does not affect the computation.

What becomes annoying are the looping boundaries, where an entry may be seen as soon as the next, or as far as a full pass.

```C
uint32_t next() {
  if(i == n) i = 0;
  uint32_t j = i + arc4random_uniform(n - i);
  swap(i, j);
  return t[i++];
}
```

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 2 | 0.02 | horrid |
| max | 199 | 1.99 | horrid |
| avg | 100.01 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 40.41 | 0.40 | ideal |

## In Order

Let's compare our metrics with a sequence that loops, but isn't shuffled. Now the distance between each entry is ideal, but the variance is zero. In other words, listener knows which song will come next.

```C
uint32_t next() {
  if(i == n) i = 0;
  return t[i++];
}
```

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 100 | 1.00 | ideal |
| max | 100 | 1.00 | ideal |
| avg | 100.00 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 0.00 | 0.00 | horrid |

## Two Shuffles

In an effort to improve the minimum distance between the same entries in our shuffled looping sequence, we can split it in halves. The entries of the first half will be seen, followed by the entries of the second half. Shuffling is per halves, so the minimum distance between two entries is now half the size of the sequence.

![Sequence split in two](https://github.com/fluxrider/disjoint_shuffle/raw/master/split.png "Sequence split in two")

This is fairly straightforward, and does not require much more computation per entry.

However, the variance is left to be desired. Over just one loop, the listener knows which songs are in which group and is well informed on what cannot possibly play next.

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times. The halves are 50 in length.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 51 | 0.51 | good |
| max | 149 | 1.49 | good |
| avg | 100.00 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 20.34 | 0.20 | good |

## Two Shuffles (random size)

To improve the variance, we can split our sequence in ramdomly sized halves each loop. This way, entries can travel across over multiple pass.

![Sequence split at random points](https://github.com/fluxrider/disjoint_shuffle/raw/master/split_r.png "Sequence split at random points")

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times. The halves have a random length between [25, 75].

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 29 | 0.29 | good |
| max | 168 | 1.68 | good |
| avg | 100.01 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 22.88 | 0.23 | good |

## Disjoint Shuffle

To improve the variance even further, I propose we interlace the halves a little bit. The shuffle of a half is a bit more complex to implement now that its entries are disjoint in space, but the overall cost of computing the next entry in the sequence is still marginal.

![Sequence split in half with random interlace size](https://github.com/fluxrider/disjoint_shuffle/raw/master/disjoint.png "Sequence split in half with random interlace size")

The idea is that the interlacing makes it harder to track in which half a given entry is.
TODO this is a gut statement without any backing.

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times. The halves are 50 in length, with the disjoint cut being random between 1 and 25 from the center.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 28 | 0.28 | good |
| max | 174 | 1.74 | good |
| avg | 100.01 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 27.97 | 0.28 | good |

## Overlap Reshuffle

An alternate solution to the same problem is to shuffle two halves, then shuffle an overlaping region over both halves. This however, comes at the penalty of having to shuffle the list completely before use. This algorithm is not iterative.

![Split sequence re-shuffled in center](https://github.com/fluxrider/disjoint_shuffle/raw/master/overlap.png "Split sequence re-shuffled in center")

```C
uint32_t next() {
  if(i == n) i = 0;
  if(i == 0) {
    shuffle(0, n / 2);
    shuffle(n / 2, n);
    shuffle(n / 4, 3 * n / 4);
  }
  return t[i++];
}
```

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times. The halves are 50 in length, and the overlap covers 25 in each.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 26 | 0.26 | good |
| max | 174 | 1.74 | good |
| avg | 100.00 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 27.09 | 0.27 | good |

# References

[1] VLC Media Player
[2] Fisher-Yate Shuffle

Commit message:

degenerate case, and algo verification

README.md, after:

Disjoint Shuffle in a Looping Sequence
=====
© 2018 David Lareau, Independent Scientist

# Abstract

This paper proposes a novel approach at shuffling a looping sequence that minimizes caveats of naive solutions, keeps computation low, and offers a high degree of variance.

# Introduction

Imagine you are listening to the songs of an album, and set it up such that the songs be played in random order, and that the albums loops. What are your expectation once all songs have played? Should the songs be replayed in the same order, or should they be reshuffled? If you expect the later, are you ok with the last song you've heard being the next first song?

This paper compares various ways of generating a shuffled looping sequence, measuring statistics on the distance between duplicate entries.

## Degenerate Cases

Even for a sequence as small as 2 items, it becomes important to use a smart algorithm to avoid having two items in a row.

TODO When does disjoint shuffle becomes better than split or split_r?

The example of a music album (~12 songs) being played in a loop is not as contemporary as it used to be. This paper disregard that an easy way out of the problem is to add more songs, such that the shuffled sequence never needs to loop in one listening session.

## Related Works

The algorithms described in this paper are presented to build-up to the less intuitive **Disjoint Shuffle**. The literature doesn't seem to cover shuffling looping sequence, so I chose names for each algorithms.

In the wild, it is common for music players to have a *Random* or *Shuffle* feature. In VLC Media Player [1] 3.0.4 on a Linux desktop, the behavior of the *Random* toggle is like the **Shuffle** algorithm described below, where the same song can be heard twice in a row at the looping boundaries.

TODO look at more players out there.

# Algorithms

## Stateless

One of the simplest algorithm to think about when generating the next entry in a sequence is to select it randomly, without keeping track of any states. This opens up the possibility that an item be seen an infinite amount of times in a row, or never be seen at all.

The variance in the sequence is ideal, meaning the next entry is always a surprise.

```C
uint32_t next() {
  return arc4random_uniform(n);
}
```

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 1 | 0.01 | horrid |
| max | 946 | 9.46 | horrid |
| avg | 100.26 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 98.29 | 0.98 | ideal |

## Shuffle

An improvement over the stateless method, is to keep the sequence shuffled in memory, visiting each entry once before reshuffling it and going over it again.

At the cost of memory, we now avoid the embarassing flaws of the stateless approach. All entries will be seen, and only once per full pass. The variance is much lower than the stateless approach because of these restrictions, but it's still ideal given the compromise.

Note that the common algorithm for shuffling (Fisher-Yate [2]) is iterative, so you do not need to shuffle the whole list prior of reading the next entry. You can perform the shuffle one item at a time, meaning the size of the sequence does not affect the computation.

What becomes annoying are the looping boundaries, where an entry may be seen as soon as the next, or as far as a full pass.

```C
uint32_t next() {
  if(i == n) i = 0;
  uint32_t j = i + arc4random_uniform(n - i);
  swap(i, j);
  return t[i++];
}
```

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 2 | 0.02 | horrid |
| max | 199 | 1.99 | horrid |
| avg | 100.01 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 40.41 | 0.40 | ideal |

## In Order

Let's compare our metrics with a sequence that loops, but isn't shuffled. Now the distance between each entry is ideal, but the variance is zero. In other words, listener knows which song will come next.

```C
uint32_t next() {
  if(i == n) i = 0;
  return t[i++];
}
```

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 100 | 1.00 | ideal |
| max | 100 | 1.00 | ideal |
| avg | 100.00 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 0.00 | 0.00 | horrid |

## Two Shuffles

In an effort to improve the minimum distance between the same entries in our shuffled looping sequence, we can split it in halves. The entries of the first half will be seen, followed by the entries of the second half. Shuffling is per halves, so the minimum distance between two entries is now half the total size of the sequence.

![Sequence split in two](https://github.com/fluxrider/disjoint_shuffle/raw/master/split.png "Sequence split in two")

This is fairly straightforward, and does not require much more computation per entry. However, the variance is left to be desired. Over just one loop, the listener knows which songs are in which group and is well informed on what cannot possibly play next.

The shuffle is now biased, so it becomes harder to verify that the implementation of this algorith is correct. You would need to verify that each half has been shuffle correctly without bias.

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times. The halves are 50 in length.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 51 | 0.51 | good |
| max | 149 | 1.49 | good |
| avg | 100.00 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 20.34 | 0.20 | good |

## Two Shuffles (random size)

To improve the variance, we can split our sequence in ramdomly sized halves each loop. This way, entries can travel across over multiple pass.

![Sequence split at random points](https://github.com/fluxrider/disjoint_shuffle/raw/master/split_r.png "Sequence split at random points")

The halfpoint is now random, so in order to verify that the implementation of this algorithm is correct, one would need to control this random number.

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times. The halves have a random length between [25, 75].

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 29 | 0.29 | good |
| max | 168 | 1.68 | good |
| avg | 100.01 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 22.88 | 0.23 | good |

## Disjoint Shuffle

To improve the variance even further, I propose we interlace the halves a little bit. The shuffle of a half is a bit more complex to implement now that its entries are disjoint in space, but the overall cost of computing the next entry in the sequence is still marginal.

![Sequence split in half with random interlace size](https://github.com/fluxrider/disjoint_shuffle/raw/master/disjoint.png "Sequence split in half with random interlace size")

The idea is that the interlacing makes it harder to track in which half a given entry is.
TODO this is a gut statement without any backing.

In order to verify that the implementation of this algorithm is sound, one would need to control the random interlace size. The test file verify.c does this and checks that the two groups are shuffled without bias. TODO write verify.c

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times. The halves are 50 in length, with the disjoint cut being random between 1 and 25 from the center.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 28 | 0.28 | good |
| max | 174 | 1.74 | good |
| avg | 100.01 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 27.97 | 0.28 | good |

## Overlap Reshuffle

An alternate solution to the same problem is to shuffle two halves, then shuffle an overlaping region over both halves. This however, comes at the penalty of having to shuffle the list completely before use. This algorithm is not iterative.

![Split sequence re-shuffled in center](https://github.com/fluxrider/disjoint_shuffle/raw/master/overlap.png "Split sequence re-shuffled in center")

```C
uint32_t next() {
  if(i == n) i = 0;
  if(i == 0) {
    shuffle(0, n / 2);
    shuffle(n / 2, n);
    shuffle(n / 4, 3 * n / 4);
  }
  return t[i++];
}
```

Distance statistics in a simulation with a sequence of 100 elements, looping 10,000 times. The halves are 50 in length, and the overlap covers 25 in each.

| Distance | Value | Normalized | Comment |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| min | 26 | 0.26 | good |
| max | 174 | 1.74 | good |
| avg | 100.00 | 1.00 | ideal |
| std | 27.09 | 0.27 | good |

# References

[1] VLC Media Player
[2] Fisher-Yate Shuffle
